In late 1987 and in 1988, there was a great deal of
excitement in the House of South Texas area about
the expansion of higher education in South Texas
and the further development of
this area with regards to institutions of higher
education. There was no question that South Texas
had been neglected with regards to higher
education. And the legislators in South Texas
placed the blame at the feet of the legislature as a
whole. The truth of the matter is that the
legislature responds to requests that are made by
individual legislators. Not that they always get
what they ask for, but they first have to ask for it.
Now Texas, by 1987, had emerged from the old
patrone system that really had little regard for
higher education for its masses. and most of the
legislators responded accordingly. I recall one
time in earlier years when I was serving in the
legislature, this was about 1974 as I can best
remember, I struck up a conversation with the
state representative from Duval County one day
and I stated that I see that he has an opponent in the
election.
And he was devoting some time to campaigning. Let
me know very quickly that he did not have to
campaign, that George Parr elected him, and see to
it that he was reelected. This particular state
representative at that time had I'm sure no
interest in promoting higher education in South
Texas.
In 87 and 88 all of this had changed with the
election of a new generation of legislators that
were no longer under the control of certain
politically powerful individuals. This is not to
suggest that all state representatives and
senators in South Texas were under anyone's
person's control, such as George Parr, is simply
to point out that there was that environment in
South Texas
in the earlier years and prior years. We began to
think about what we would be proposing to the joint
committee that was established to look at higher
education in South Texas. We came to certain
conclusions, but recognized the fact that the
University of Texas system would need to be
conferred with on all these matters. There were
essentially five institutions, three that
existed within the University of South Texas
system.
i.e., Corpus Christi State University, Texas A&I
University in Kingsville, and Laredo State
University in Laredo. In Edinburgh, Texas, there
was Pan American University with a branch in
Brownsville. that was strictly an upper-level
institution and located on the Junior College
campus in Brownsville, Texas. Our initial
meeting with the University of Texas System
Chancellor that they were interested in Pan
American University at Edinburgh with its branch
in Brownsville and Laredo State University
becoming a part of the University of Texas system
and leaving the Texas A&M University system with
Corpus Christi State University and Texas A&I
University. in Laredo State University was
because of the fact they had University of Texas at
El Paso on the border to the west and would have Pan
American University in Brownsville campus to the
east and would like to have Laredo since it was also
located on the border. There was a great deal of
interest in international trade with Mexico at
the time and the University of Texas System
Chancellor felt like that they, being the
University of Texas System, would like to take the
lead in international trade and therefore would
like to have Laredo State University in their
system.
impression was that this would be the final result
for several reasons. Number one, Pan American
University had almost become a part of the
University of Texas system some years earlier and
there had always been that close tie. Number two,
the state senator in the Lareda area was a graduate
of the University of Texas system and would
probably lean toward putting Laredo in the
University of Texas system. The A&I University
was a logical fit with Texas A&M University
because of the programs that they offered. And the
Texas system chancellor had let the people in
Corpus Christi know that they were not interested
in Corpus Christi. I failed to take into account
was the fact that the University of Texas system
had two other upper level institutions within its
system already. One at Tyler and the University of
Texas at Permian Basin. The state was an upper
level institution as well as Corpus Christi State
University. It was not long until we were notified
that the University of Texas system had no
interest in Laredo State University becoming a
part of their system. The reason became quite
obvious that they did not want to take in any
upper-level institutions that were interested
in becoming four-year institutions.
It's quite evident that both Corpus Christi State
University and Laredo State University wanted
four-year status. left the Texas A&M University
system with the old South Texas system intact,
i.e., Corpus Christi State University, Texas
A&I, and Laredo, with the University of Texas
system picking up Pan American University and its
branch in Brownsville. For the
misunderstandings in the merger talk, was the
Chamber of Commerce people thinking that if they
joined the University of Texas system or the Texas
A&M University system, they would become heirs of
the permanent university fund. They just had not
read the Texas Constitution, which clearly would
leave these institutions outside of the
Permanent University Fund and continue in the
Higher Education Assistance Fund. Hearings were
held during this interim period in
Brownsville, Edinburgh, and Laredo.
I recall that the University of Texas system
chancellor and I traveled together attending
those hearings and testifying before the joint
committee. In those hearings that the University
of Texas system chancellor made it clear that they
could not support an institution moving from an
upper level status to four year status. On the
other hand, I was authorized by the NM System Board
of Regents to say that we would support such a move
if the legislature so designated. Later on, I will
discuss the name change controversy
with regards to the South Texas Institution's
merger into the Texas A&M University System and
the Lieutenant Governor's later interest in
moving the Laredo State University
to the University of Texas System.
As we moved into the legislative session
convening in January of 1989,
was evident to me that we were going to have a
struggle with regards to the general revenue
appropriations to higher education.
Representative Tom Uher, who had been a champion
for higher education, had been removed from his
position as chairman of the Budget and Oversight
Committee in the House Committee on Higher
Education.
the chairman of the House Appropriations
Committee had instructed
all proposals
to contain a 5% reduction in general revenue
appropriations. The chairman of the Budget and
Oversight Committee that sat on the Higher
Education Committee and the Appropriations
Committee
began to make the 5% reductions, but the cuts were
even deeper than that because he was adding
special items for members that served on his
committee. A school was not on the committee. they
resulted, the school got even bigger cuts than 5%.
Though Representative Uher had been removed from
the subcommittee that made the proposal to the
Higher Education Committee and then on to the
Appropriations Committee, he still was a member
of the Higher Education Committee. He approached
me and the rest of higher education with a proposal
that we fund higher education with a $500 million
increase that would be fairly and evenly spread
throughout higher education. The University of
Texas system had created a model for doing this,
and so it was suggested that they would furnish the
dollar amounts to Representative Uher. We're
working on a very short time fuse, but University
of Texas system officials felt like that they
could accomplish this in very short order. We had
less than one week to get all this done. After a few
days had passed, I decided to do a follow-up to be
sure that the University of Texas system was
putting together a proposal that Representative
Uher had requested. Learned that they planned to
do nothing about it, even though they had said they
would. Learning this, I asked our officials here
at the Texas A&M University System if they could
put together such a proposal within a matter of
hours. We were able to do this and carry it to
Representative Uher and to all of higher
education the following week. Representative
Uher offered his substitute to the full Committee
on Higher Education, and it passed. However, when
the proposal reached the House Appropriations
Committee, Chairman Rudd refused to accept it
because it was over the 5% reduction that, in fact,
had an increase that he had said that he wanted in
the proposal that came forward. Interesting to
note, however, that within a few days following
this proposal being presented to the House
Appropriations Committee The committee
chairman and the speaker reversed their
positions and decided that these reductions
would not be in order and that they would no longer
be imposed by the chairman.
The 1989 General Appropriations Act did in fact
include about four to five hundred million
dollars additional funds for higher education,
almost identical in dollar amounts to those that
Representative Uher had proposed. The bill to
transfer the
South Texas institutions into the Texas A&M
University system and the University of Texas
system that has been previously discussed was
filed as two separate bills and were passed
through the legislature with relative ease. One
of the issues that was in the bill to transfer the
South Texas University system into the Texas A&M
University system dealt with the changing of the
names of those institutions. Regents at that time
objected to the dealing with the name changes in
the bill and asked me to discuss it with the author
of the bill. They did this and the author agreed to
withdraw the provision in the bill that provided
for name changes of the South Texas institutions.
There was a separate bill passed that gave the A&M
System Board of Regents the authority to make
these name changes.
A&M Board took no action on this matter for quite
some time, which led to infuriating
the senators in the South Texas system and the
lieutenant governor at a later date. I will
discuss when we get to 1993. There were other bills
in 1989 that were significant to the Texas A&M
University System. One that
specifically mentioned Texas A&M or the Texas A&M
University System was a bill to
publish a Central Texas College in Killeen and a
private college on the Central Texas College
campus and create a four-year institution in
Killeen near Fort Hood known as Central Texas
University. The bill was passed by
Representative Stan Sleater with the
understanding that he would be later interested
in making it a part of the A&M system but did not want
to deal with that issue at this time. The bill had a
future date of 1999 that the new university would
be created, provided certain obligations were
taken care of and the two existing boards were
abolished, creating a new board for a
state-supported institution. One of the
concessions that Representative Sleater had to
make to get the bill passed and signed, or not
passed, but signed by the governor, Ann Richards,
was to agreed to pass a bill in a special session
that would follow to allow the Coordinating Board
to approve this new institution before it became
in effect. Representative Sleater did
subsequently pass such a bill which required the
Coordinating Board's approval of the new
institution prior to it coming into existence.
This is still a pending matter and has not been
resolved by the Coordinating Board at this time
that I am at this time of this being written. The
1989 regular session was a session that the
student recreation sports fee was established
for Texas A&M University. This generated the
funds and the bonding allowance,
bonding authority for
the building of the student recreation
center that is now one of the magnificent
facilities on the Texas A&M campus. There was
concern on the part of the local legislator that
the students might not want to assess themselves
for the fee to build the facility since they would
never get to use it by the time it was built. And this
was really something that the administration
wanted. But we were able to convince the
legislature that the students really and truly
did want it and were willing to pay for it. Issues in
the appropriations process was the threat of
losing accreditation of the vet school. The
veterinary school at Texas A&M had been
threatened with loss of accreditation if they did
not improve their facilities. This
may have not been as serious a threat as it first
appeared, but was used as leverage to get
appropriations
for the vet school and to bring the board around to
appropriating the funds to build additional
facilities at the vet school. The discussion and
hearing regarding the accreditation of the vet
school led to a rider that required whatever
tuition the vet school raised to be spent on the
programs at that particular school. This removed
some of the flexibility that had previously been
given Texas A&M in expending their tuition
revenue monies that were not designated for any
particular college or school within the Texas
A&M. After 1989, the Texas A&M University System
Board of Regents had decided to develop and build
the facilities for an Institute of Biosciences
and Technology on the side of the old Shamrock
Hotel building in Houston, Texas, which is across
the street and on Main Street from the Texas
Medical Center. Funds were generated from
primarily federal sources and some private
sources to get the buildings built. U.S. Senator
Lloyd Benson was chiefly responsible in getting
these funds in the appropriations bills over the
years at the federal level. before the 1989 Texas
legislature was the need for funding the facility
for operational expenses once it was open. This
was to be primarily a research or solely a research
facility to work with the Texas Medical Center.
and would give the Texas Medical Center access to
the expertise on the main campus at Texas A&M
University. The Texas A&M System Board of Regents
had the authority to establish the institute
without legislative approval, but it had been my
experience that if the legislature acted
affirmatively on such a program, there was a
better chance of getting appropriation. So we
decided to and asked the legislature to
officially sanction the program by a bill that
would establish the Institute of Biosciences and
Technology in Houston as a part of Texas A&M
University. I think this did, in fact, get us a $7.5
million appropriation for that biennium, for the
upcoming biennium beginning in 1989 for the
Institute. Without the accompanying bill, we
very likely would not have gotten funding for the
Institute. Very similar program,
was one in Galveston at Texas A&M University,
Galveston, called the Texas Institute of
Oceanography. The Texas Institute of
Oceanography, as the Institute of Bioscience and
Technology, could be approved and established by
the Texas A&M University System Board of Regents.
But here again, the question was a matter of
funding. So a bill was filed to create, by
legislative act, the Texas Institute of
Oceanography in Galveston in hopes that we could
get an appropriations attached to that or to
accompany that creation. Again, this was...
done very similar to the Institute of Biosciences
and Technology, and a $1.3 million appropriation
was attached. Incidentally, the Texas Institute
of Oceanography is created and allows A&M to work
with the University of Texas in its research
programs. I'm not sure whether that has ever
happened. been accomplished or not, but it is a
part of the legislation. The Texas A&M University
system was fortunate in 1989 to have the
appointment of its own local state senator from
Bryan College Station appointed as chairman of
the Senate Finance Committee. This came about as a
result of the defeat of the chairman of the Senate
Finance Committee in his local district, Senator
Grant Jones. Later than the appointment of
Caperton, most of the leadership in the
legislature remained about the same as it was in
1987. During the elections in 1990, Senator
Caperton of Bryan chose not to seek re-election
and convening of the legislative session in 1991,
Senator John Monford was named chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee. Chairman Monford was
appointed by Lieutenant Governor Bob Bullock.
The leadership in the House remained the same.
Gibb Lewis was Speaker and Jim Rudd remained as
Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.
1991. The 1991 regular session of the Texas
Legislature would be the first session that the
three South Texas schools, Corpus Christi State
University, Laredo State University, and Texas
A&I would function as a part of the Texas A&M
University system. One of the major concerns of
Corpus Christi State University and Laredo State
University was the problem of how to construct
facilities on those campuses and where the monies
could come from.
I had suggested to the president of Corpus Christi
State University when the question arose that
years before, tuition revenue bonds had been
authorized by the legislature and might be a
possible source of funds for the building of
facilities on that campus. Tuition revenue bonds
sound like a great idea at first until you realize
that it's really money, if they're really general
revenue bonds, you're taking the money directly
out of the general revenue to replace the tuition
revenue that is used to retire those bonds.
Otherwise, the institution would suffer a great
loss of revenue that it needs for its operations. A
bill was drafted authorizing Corpus Christi
State University to sell bonds, pledging tuition
revenue from throughout the Texas A&M University
system, and the bill was passed and became law.
Earlier that same year, there was a special
session, and Laredo State University,
having a similar problem, decided to copy the bill
that Corpus Christi State University had passed
authorizing the sale of bonds pledging tuition
revenue of the Texas A&M University system. The
radar state was able to get a bill through in that
special session, and so they were likewise
authorized to pledge tuition revenue of the A&M
system to sell bonds to raise funds for capital
improvements. It was about this time that I
decided to once again try to develop a grassroots
program for the Texas A&M University System. This
later became known as TAMUS LIFE, which is an
acronym for the Texas A&M University System
Legislative Information for Education. New
programs have been developed around the country,
but they were springing up because of the lack of
support for higher education, and most of this was
because of the economic times that we were going
through. I began to review what other states were
doing and found out that most of these successful
programs were being operated by the alumni
associations in various states. There were some
states like Indiana where several universities
had gone together to create one statewide
organization. The Texas A&M University system
was a system consisting of a number of
institutions. I knew that the alumni connection
would not work as a way to spin off a grassroots
organization. The only model for a system
operating such a program was California. It
appeared to have a very successful program that
operated at the system level. The more I learned
about grassroots organizations in other states,
the more encouraged I became that Texas A&M
University System needed a similar program. So
hopeful that we could link up with the University
of Texas System, but this never occurred. I did run
across two studies where legislators and former
legislators were surveyed, to determine what
influenced them with regards to their decisions
on higher education. The two states that had
conducted a survey were Florida and Alabama. The
results of the two are very similar, and I will not
go into detail with regards to those results of
those studies. However, to summarize, they both
agreed that their own lifetime experiences,
speaking now of legislators, was the greatest
influencing factor.
There's nothing that a grassroots organization
can do to change or influence the lifetime
experiences that a legislator has had with
regards to higher education. Moving on to the
second most important influencing factor was a
trusted friend. areas where a grassroots
organization can have a tremendous impact by
identifying those trusted friends and asking
them to assist whenever the need arises. It's
interesting to note that at the very bottom of the
scale were such factors as radio ads, TV ads,
newspapers, and billboards. These were at the
bottom of the list of priorities as far as
legislators are concerned in influencing
factors. Our effort with Tempest Live was to set
out to identify friends of legislators that would
speak favorably for higher education and the A&M
system schools.
There were several deterrents to this being as
successful a program as it could be. For one, the
newer schools that had come in saw Texas A&M
University as the enemy because they were not
allowing the other schools to share in the
permanent university fund. Of course, this is
something A&M had no control over since it is a part
of the Texas Constitution. Second, we found that
the schools were very proprietary in sharing with
the system a list of their friends that they had
established themselves and did not want to share
their support groups with the system. The A&M
system as an entity has no alumni, It had to draw
upon the various alumni from the various
institutions. A program of this sort to be
successful requires that the people that are
supporting you, are forming the support group,
must be informed on the issues and how they should
contact their legislators. To accomplish this,
we went around the state, mainly in areas where we
had colleges and universities that are part of the
Texas A&M University System, and met with the
support groups and explained to them what they
could do and how they could be of assistance to us. I
detected that we were only getting token support
from the leadership on the various campuses. By
the session beginning in 1993, we did have a core
group of about 800 supporters that were signed up.
And we were able to make some effective use of this
in contacting legislators and letting them know
of these people supporting higher education and
Texas A&M University System in particular. In one
particular case, very late in the regular session
of 1993, the chairman of the Senate Finance
Committee called several of us to his office, and
several of us being some of the people in Austin
that worked with higher education institutions,
and indicated to us that it was very important that
the public school finance bill pass in the House.
Otherwise, the appropriations bill would have to
be reopened and monies diverted from higher
education to the public school finance bill. This
was a direct threat to higher education
appropriations, which had been pretty well
buttoned down by then. So I immediately contacted
our statewide chairman, of our grassroots
program and he went out of communications to the
leaders of the Tammis Life program asking them to
contact their house members and assist in getting
the public school finance bill passed. I always
hope that the people in the support group
understand why it's necessary to support
something like public school finance at such a
time without saying that you had been threatened.
But it was effective and we were able to let the
leadership know that in the legislature
was that we had taken such action and I'm sure that
it was a very critical issue to them and I'm sure
they appreciated our support. Getting public
school finance passed during the regular
session. There was one other piece of legislation
that was introduced by a legislator from Lubbock
that would have dismantle the permanent
university fund. I did not see this as an immediate
threat to the permanent university fund because
of the interrelationships and the fact that the
legislator was a first term member and just had not
recognized how much support could be generated
for the permanent university fund if it became
necessary. I did expect him to get a hearing on his
bill because the chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee was a graduate and a
strong supporter of Texas Tech. I suggested to our
people that we not get too exercised over the bill
at its initial stages, but the University of Texas
system took a different approach. They were very
active in trying to get the bill killed very early.
This led to them being lectured to by the
Chairman's House Appropriations Committee that
they had violated a provision in the
appropriations bill which prohibits
that work for an institution or state agency from
lobbying for or against legislation. It is a very
fine line, but there is a difference in going to
someone and asking him to vote against the bill and
going to him and explaining the impact of the
legislation. On the very last day of that
legislation, I was informed that I was no longer
Executive Secretary of the Board of Regents and
was being reassigned as Director of Public
Policy.
This was described to me as a lateral move, but
obviously it was not. The position of director is
not as elevated as the position of vice
chancellor.
I was never advised as to why this change was made.
And it would serve no useful purpose for me to
speculate as to why the position change was made
and why the position of Director of Public Policy
was even created. It was very difficult and trying
because for one thing, we were changing
chancellors about every year. There were 12
months during that period of time. In the summer of
1994, approximately one year later, the
chancellor was reassigned, and at that time, the
system vice chancellor and general counsel was
moved to Austin and reassigned as vice chancellor
for state affairs. Shortly thereafter, I started
spending two days in Austin when during the
interim when the legislature was not in session to
be in touch with the new vice chancellor for state
affairs and to have secretarial support. By the
time the legislature convened in January 1995
another new chancellor had been named and A new
person was brought in to serve as chief for
legislative affairs. This was an unfilled
position that had been on the books for some time.
In the 1995 legislative session, I spent as much
time in Austin as I had in the past. That is three or
four days a week during the time they're in
session. And even more than that, toward the end of
the session, able to accomplish a great deal
during that session, just being the eyes and ears
of the system. Members of the legislature
continued to call upon me and seek my advice on
various issues. At one point in time during the
session, the chairman of the, the dean of the
Senate,
called me in to work on legislation that would
create a medical branch in Corpus Christi, part of
the Texas A&M University Medical School. The
legislation did not get very far through the
process, but I was able to provide a supportive
role to this influential member of the Texas
Senate. In the 1993 regular session of the Texas
legislature, a bill was filed that would transfer
Texas A&M International University in Laredo
from the Texas A&M University system to the
University of Texas system. This was not in the
best interest of the Texas A&M University system
and would have created a negative image on the part
of Texas A&M University and the Texas A&M
University system. It passed easily in the Texas
Senate with the support of the Lieutenant
Governor and to the House of Representatives was
referred to the House Higher Education Committee
for a hearing.